---
title: 'Stripey strokes in Affinity Designer'
date: 2025-03-03T23:30:00Z
description:
  'How to use rainbows and other stripey effects as a stroke in Affinity
  Designer.'
---

Yesterday I found myself wanting to make an image where a pride rainbow followed
a specific path. For reference, here's an idea of the kind of thing I wanted to
make:

![A curved shape that looks like part of an infinity symbol. It's made of a six-colour rainbow.](/img/2025-03/rainbow.png)

As usual I fired up
[Affinity Designer](https://affinity.serif.com/en-gb/designer/), my vector image
editor of choice, thinking it surely must be possible to do so in a few
straightforward steps.

Oh how wrong I was.

At the end I'll explain exactly how I ended up doing it, but first I want to
take you on the journey I went on. To simplify things a bit, I'll make a
3-colour stripe instead of 6, but the steps are exactly the same. Here's the
pattern we're going to use:

![A rectangle with three horizontal stripes, one blue, one green, and one pink.](/img/2025-03/straight.png)

Very simple to do if you only want straight lines! This can be made by aligning
three rectangles.

![The layers panel in Affinity Designer showing how the previous image was created using three rectangles, one of each colour.](/img/2025-03/rectangles.png)

So let's start trying to solve this problem.

The first thing I tried was to apply multiple strokes to the same path using the
Appearance panel.

![The appearance panel in Affinity Designer showing three strokes applied to the same shape, each with decreasing width.](/img/2025-03/appearance-stacked.png)

Doing this causes the strokes to overlap like layers, and you can create
something that approaches what we're looking for:

![The half infinity symbol with a pink stripe running through the centre of the shape, surrounded by green, which is then surrounded by blue.](/img/2025-03/stacked.png)

But it's not quite right; we want one stripe of each colour, and here we have
two blue and two green stripes. While searching around for solutions to this, I
learned an interesting fact: that this effect is similar to
[d√©coupage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decoupage), although that is a
physical art form.

I couldn't find any ways to use this stacking effect without causing the doubled
up stripes, so it was back to the drawing board.

My next idea was to use a gradient. A stripe effect can be created by carefully
overlapping the colour stops so that they don't fade into one another but
instead change immediately.

![The gradient tool panel showing a blue, green, and pink gradient.](/img/2025-03/gradient-rectangle.png)

There are six colour stops forming the above gradient; blue at 0%, blue and
green overlapping at 33%, green and pink overlapping at 66%, and pink at 100%.
The overlap is what causes the hard break between colours.

My previous experiments with this gradient technique led me to think I could
create my stripey stroke by doing a similar thing. But as soon as I started,
before even adding the overlapping colour stops, I realised there's a problem
with how Affinity Designer handles gradients inside shapes:

![The half-infinity shape with a blue, green, and pink gradient running along it horizontally.](/img/2025-03/gradient.png)

It essentially treats the shape as a mask over the gradient. That is, you can
imagine the gradient is secretly rendered as a rectangle behind the shape, and
the shape itself is a cutout allowing us to see the gradient through it. The
gradient doesn't actually follow the shape.

We recently passed the 10 year anniversary of someone
[requesting](https://forum.affinity.serif.com/index.php?/topic/5850-request-designer-gradient-in-stroke/)
the ability to have the gradient follow the shape, but sadly it hasn't made its
way into the app yet.

However, while perusing the forums to see what people had to say about gradients
and strokes, I discovered a
[post](https://forum.affinity.serif.com/index.php?/topic/13517-stroke-gradient-along-curve-or-path/#comment-229490_wrap)
describing a way to do exactly what we want!

They don't describe exactly how to do it, so I'll do so here as a way of
documenting the method. What they're talking about is the option to create a
brush using an image as a repeating texture. This is found in the Brushes panel,
in the context menu listed as "New Textured Image Brush".

![The brushes panel with the menu open and New Textured Image Brush selected.](/img/2025-03/new-brush.png)

Choosing this option asks you to select an image file to use as the texture. For
our case, we can create a square image that has the three stripes we're
interested in (in fact, I used the three rectangles method to do so). Here's
that image:

![A square with three horizontal stripes in blue, green, and pink.](/img/2025-03/brush-texture.png)

Selecting the texture image creates a new brush, and you can immediately see how
it's going to help our mission.

![The brushes panel showing a brush that will make a line made out of the previously created stripes.](/img/2025-03/brush.png)

So all we need to do now is apply this brush to our path, and we'll be done! I
didn't actually know you could do this before now, so it was interesting to find
out about this option.

It's actually very easy: in the Stroke panel, choose the option that looks like
a brush, then in the Brushes panel choose the brush you want to use.

![The stroke and brushes panels after following the previous steps.](/img/2025-03/set-brush-stroke.png)

Then set the stroke width, and we'll be done! Wait, that doesn't look right...

![The half infinity symbol with three stripes in different shades of grey.](/img/2025-03/grey.png)

What's going on here? It took me a while to figure out, but the stroke still has
a colour set, so it's not using the colours from the texture. Just clear the
stroke colour in the Color panel and it'll suddenly use the right colours.

![The half infinity symbol with three stripes; pink, green, and blue](/img/2025-03/reversed.png)

There's just one last issue: we wanted the blue stripe to be at the top, and
this version is upside down for some reason. This can happen based on the
direction you drew the path in, but it's easily fixed without having to make a
new brush.

Select the path in the Layers panel, then switch to the Node tool. In the top
toolbar is an option labelled "Reverse Curves". Choose that and it'll flip the
texture around so it looks correct!

![The half infinity symbol with the same stripes but in the opposite order.](/img/2025-03/final.png)

It looks great, but there are some limitations to this technique:

- The stroke caps cannot be rounded. Even if you choose the rounded option,
  they'll stay straight. It might be possible to fix this by adjusting the
  brush, but I don't know enough about brushes to know how.
- It can look a bit funky if the path has very tight curves.
- You can't add arrow heads to the path.

But I think this technique can still be used to great effect in a lot of cases!

As a final note, here's the texture image I used to create the actual rainbow
from the very start of the post. You can just download it directly and use it as
a brush.

![A square with horizontal stripes forming the six-colour pride rainbow.](/img/2025-03/rainbow-texture.png)
