---
title: 'Improving board game storage'
date: 2025-08-24T13:30:00.000Z
description: 'Relationship ended with kallax, now billy is my new best friend.'
hero: /img/2025-08/hero.jpeg
---

In board game circles, there's a common sentiment that ikea's kallax shelving
system is one of the best ways to store board games. In fact board game
publishers sometimes even use the size of a kallax shelf as a reference for how
big their game's box is.

When I started my board game collection, I stored them on a spare shelf on a
bookcase I already had, because I only had a handful of games. But when the
collection outgrew that shelf, I followed the trend and bought a kallax for
them. Eventually my collection spread out to fill a 4x4 kallax.

![A white shelving unit divided into square sections, each containing around 4 board games.](/img/2025-08/kallax.jpeg)

The above photo is a few months old, so I don't have exactly the same games in
my collection anymore, but it gets the point across.

The important thing is you can see how storing board games on a kallax is
inefficient due to the divisions of the horizontal space. Each square section
fits around 4 regular-sized games, or maybe one or two more if they're
particularly small. But there's always a little bit of a gap between the games
and the shelf divider.

You can kind of mitigate this by being specific about which games you place in
the same section, to optimise the horizontal space based on the width of the
games. But it almost certainly never uses all the available space.

This is annoying for two reasons: one, you can't organise the games how you like
(by theme or by complexity, for example) if you want to maximise the use of
space, and two, if you add up all that wasted space there's definitely room for
at least one extra game which won't fit on the shelves.

Recently I finally reached enlightenment and realised kallax was not the answer.
My original plan was to replace the kallax itself with a new shelving unit. The
hot new trend is to use bestå instead of kallax — still from ikea — which is
closer to a traditional bookshelf but still offers the ability to build a more
bespoke unit from modular pieces.

But bestå is expensive! Using the online planner tool I think my design would
have cost at least £200. And considering I already _had_ useable storage, I
couldn't really justify spending £200 to marginally improve it. So I continued
putting up with my kallax system.

This month I finally realised the solution: in another corner of the same room
was an old billy bookcase — yes, yet another ikea product — that was mostly
storing random junk and displaying a few lego sets. My original idea for that
bookcase was to have it sit behind me in meetings looking cool thanks to the
lego, but my (ikea) computer chair has such a tall back that you can't even see
the lego properly anyway.

The billy is almost the same depth as the kallax, although it has a back board
which reduces the usable depth very slightly. It's still plenty deep enough for
board games. And it has two important advantages over the kallax: no dividers
breaking up the horizontal space, and moveable shelves.

So I moved my collection onto the billy instead!

![A tall white bookcase that has 6 shelves filled with board games.](/img/2025-08/billy.jpeg)

Besides being bigger in general, there's also less wasted space, because there
are only small horizontal gaps at the end of each of the 6 shelves, rather than
one in each of 16 cubes.

I've also been able to set the height of each shelf to be appropriate for the
games, rather than being stuck with the square cubbies from the kallax.

As an example of gaining horizontal space: the Arydia box on the very bottom
shelf used to take up a kallax cube all by itself (in fact it was a little too
big and stuck out the front a bit). You can just about tell that without it
being there, there'd be space for around 5 regular-sized games — whereas the
kallax cube it occupied previously would have only held 4. Since it's a campaign
game with a set story, chances are good that I'll only play through it once and
remove it from the collection afterwards, freeing up space for 5 more games.

If I find a new home for the two plastic tubs containing sewing supplies (I
never really got into sewing as a hobby...) there'll be even more space for
games than I had with the kallax.

As for the fate of the kallax: everything that previously lived on the billy
bookshelf now lives either in drawers in the kallax, or it lives in the charity
shop. Never underestimate the power of reorganising storage to make you realise
you have a bunch of stuff you don't actually need.
