---
title: 'Review of the volvo EX30 after a year'
date: 2025-06-28T10:00:00Z
description: 'My own personal checklist for setting up a new Mac from scratch.'
---

I recently [posted](https://honeycomb.engineer/@olivvybee/114672720337044651)
the following:

> We need to introduce legislation that says car reviewers have to spend at
> least a month using the car as their only vehicle before writing the review

It was written out of frustration that car reviewers tend to write their reviews
after having press access to a car for a couple of hours, and so they can never
tell you what it's like to use day to day.

Similarly, a 30 minute test drive with a salesperson in the passenger seat is
not a good representation of driving your own car in your own real life
circumstances.

The [volvo EX30](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volvo_EX30) was reviewed
extremely positively and received multiple "car of the year" awards. Thanks to
those reviews and a tempting finance offer, I test drove one and then ordered
it.

I received the keys on 28th June 2024, exactly one year ago. This post serves as
my normal-person review after actually owning the car and driving it for an
entire year, not just an afternoon. The car has done
<abbr title="13,360 km">8300 miles</abbr>, around a lot of the UK and even
[in france](/blog/2025/02/11/ex30-in-france) a few times.

This review is going to focus on the technology and controls that you have to
interact with on a daily basis when driving. The car is comfortable to sit in
and drive, but I don't really have any more opinions than that — I'm not a car
enthusiast who cares about how light the steering feels or whether the
suspension is soft enough, I just want to drive my car around to get from A to
B.

To be entirely upfront, this is not a positive review. Spoiler alert: I really
don't recommend buying one of these cars. There are a handful of things I do
like about the EX30, so I'll get those out the way first before going on to vent
my frustrations.

### The good parts

Here are the handful of things I actually enjoy about this car that contributed
to my buying one and prevent me from hating absolutely everything about it.

#### Hello yellow

I ordered the "moss yellow" colour for my EX30, and this colour was the one they
were using as the marketing colour. Seeing it when driving past the dealership
is what caught my eye and made me start researching the car in the first place.

![A bright yellow volvo EX30 as seen from the rear corner.](/img/2025-06/ex30-exterior.jpeg)

Sadly, like most car manufacturers, volvo has since decided that yellow is far
too exciting for a car and has discontinued the moss yellow option in the UK.
All the options are now either various shades of grey, or an extremely
desaturated blue (which probably looks grey in real life).

#### Co-pilot standing by

One of the driving aids available in the car is called "pilot assist", which
unlike tesla's "autopilot" is not intended to be a self-driving mode. It's
essentially adaptive cruise control with advanced lane keeping.

When you set a cruise control speed, it'll maintain that speed while adjusting
to the speed of the car in front, which is great for in traffic. It'll also
automatically steer to keep you centred in your lane, by using cameras to detect
the road markings.

I really like using this feature on the motorway, where I tend to stay at a
constant speed in one lane for a long time.

There's a subtle but nice feature where it will move over in the lane slighly
when passing a large vehicle like a lorry, which makes me feel a little safer.

There is also an automatic lane change feature where it will detect appropriate
gaps and automatically steer to change lanes, but I don't use that, partly
because you have to turn it on every time you get in the car and partly because
it's slower than changing lanes myself.

#### Going the distance

One of the main things that attracted me towards this car is the range.
According to the official figures, this "extended range" model with a 69 kWh
battery gets a range of up to 295 miles.

That figure is absolute nonsense, but that's because the _official_ figure is
nonsense for all EVs. I would love to know what they do to calculate those
figures. In real world use, I've seen this car go anywhere from 220 to 250 miles
on a charge.

My previous car was a [renault zoe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renault_Zoe)
with a 52 kWh battery and a claimed range of 239 miles, and I never got more
than about 180 miles out of it on a charge. The EX30 was a big upgrade in this
regard.

Having the ability to use 150 kW DC rapid charging helps a lot too — on a long
trip, charging for 15 minutes is usually plenty to get back up to around 80% and
continue onwards.

#### Better-than-okay google

My other favourite feature of this car is the google maps integration in the
infotainment system. The whole system runs on
[android automotive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_Automotive) (which is
_not_ the same thing as
[android auto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_Auto)!) so everything is
google-ified, including the built-in navigation. This means you get a version of
google maps that knows information about your car, like its current battery
level.

When you plan a route, it takes the battery level into account and automatically
schedules charging stops if necessary, including showing how long to charge at
each stop. It'll also provide an estimate for how much battery would be left
after a return journey.

![Google maps navigation to Heathrow terminal 2. It estimates arriving with 61% battery and returning with -24%.](/img/2025-06/google-maps-range-estimate.jpeg)

I find that the estimates are quite accurate, and lean a little pessimistic but
not overly so. On longer trips, I will often arrive with around 5% more battery
than it expected, perhaps because I try to drive quite economically anyway.

There are apps like [ABRP](https://abetterrouteplanner.com/) which can plan an
EV-specific navigation route, but only the built-in google maps can directly
read your car's current state — without jumping through some hoops, ABRP
requires that you manually tell it your starting battery level and it'll
basically guess when you need to charge.

Of course, this feature is not exclusive to the EX30, since plenty of other cars
use android automotive. But it's still a really useful feature.

#### He's behiiiind youuuu

I'm going to be talking a fair amount about driving aids and warning systems
later on, but here's one that seems to work pretty flawlessly and I find
incredibly helpful: the rear cross traffic alert, or RCTA system. If the car is
in reverse and a vehicle or pedestrian is crossing behind the car, you'll hear
an alert and see a message on the screen. This is great when mavouvering in car
parks and someone walks behind your car.

There's also a system that warns you of traffic approaching from behind when
you're parked, to prevent you opening the door into an incoming vehicle. Another
useful feature, although it's less reliable than the RCTA system. In the past it
has told me not to open my door because it saw a bush swaying in the wind.

### The frustrating parts

I specifically use the word _frustrating_ because this just my own opinion and I
can't make a blanket statement that these things are outright _bad_.

#### Tesla-fication

The EX30 has no driver display behind the steering wheel. Instead, there's a
12-inch touchscreen mounted vertically in the centre of the dashboard, like an
iPad. This is famously one of the "features" of tesla cars, moving all the
important information away from being directly in front of the driver.

![The interior of the car, which has a large touchscreen to the left of the steering wheel, displaying a homescreen of app icons.](/img/2025-06/ex30-touchscreen.jpeg)

I can only assume that someone who works for volvo saw a tesla and said "that's
cool, let's do that". I cannot think of any reason to move critical safety
information (like your vehicle's speed and warnings about the status of the car)
out of the direct view of the driver.

Actually there is one potential reason: not having a second screen behind the
steering wheel makes the car marginally cheaper to manufacture. But the EX30
isn't an overly cheap car — the price of mine came close to putting me over the
threshold for paying the UK's
[expensive car supplement](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/vehicle-tax-for-electric-and-low-emissions-vehicles#additional-rate-expensive-car-supplement).

No matter the reason, this change is strictly worse than having a proper driver
display like almost every other car (even the
[smart #1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_1), which shares a platform with
the EX30, has a driver display). Instead of a quick glance down at the top of
the steering wheel, checking your speed or reading a warning message requires
moving your head to the left. Warning messages are positioned on the left side
of the area, which is even further to look.

I actually believe that this car was originally intended to have a display
behind the steering wheel. The top section of the touchscreen, where this
information is shown, isn't touch sensitive and is even proportioned like the
driver display in the smart #1. It also doesn't run in the same software stack
as the rest of the display. And messages being on the left side really suggests
to me that it was meant to be positioned directly in front of you. (The layout
is mirrored on left hand drive cars, so it's not because of the UK model being
right hand drive.)

You'll also notice that the touchscreen takes the place of where any physical
controls might live in the middle of the dashboard. All the controls for the air
conditioning, heated seats, and even the hazard lights are all part of the
touchscreen, so they're much harder to find and operate while driving the car.
(There is a physical hazard lights button in the car, because it's required by
law, but it's on the roof so it's extremely unintuitive to press in a hurry.)

I find it very difficult to quickly increase or decrease the temperature even by
one step, since I have to keep glancing back and forth between the road and the
touchscreen.

This issue is compunded by the software sometimes not responding immediately.
I've had instances where I've had to tap to open the temperature controls three
times, because I assumed the first tap wasn't registered and pressed again, but
it actually was and so it then closed again due to the second tap.

My final gripe with the touchscreen is that everything is buried in so many
nested menus. Even the temperature controls, which are probably the most common
thing to interact with, are in a popup menu rather than being accessible at all
times.

To turn on the fog light requires three taps! You have to tap the car icon at
the bottom of the screen to open the main menu (and wait for it to slide up from
the bottom), then press the pretty small lighting icon, then tap the button to
turn on the fog light. On a normal car, it would be a physical switch on the
indicator stalk that you could probably learn to use without looking.

Volvo's solution for avoiding the touchscreen is meant to be asking google
assistant to do things for you. But there are some things it straight up can't
do, like controlling the lights, and sometimes it does the wrong thing. For
example, on multiple occasions I've said "set the heated steering wheel to two"
and even though it confirmed it ("okay, setting the steering wheel heater to
two") it set it to level three isntead, which I find too warm most of the time.

Google assistant also relies on having a stable internet connection, which is
nonexistent when you're driving down country roads away from civilisation, so
you'll just get a response of "it looks like there's something wrong with the
connection, please try again".

#### Shining bright

Continuing the theme of changing how controls work, the high beam lights are
designed perfectly for you to accidentally dazzle people by flashing them.

There are three modes: dipped, automatic high beam (where the car dips the
headlights automatically when there's another car nearby), and manual high beam
(where the high beams stay on until you turn them off). That is the order that
the car cycles through the modes, and you cannot skip from auto to off using the
stalk, which means that if you want to turn off the auto high beams because
you've seen a car approaching in the distance and you don't trust automatic mode
to keep them dipped, you will always flash them briefly when turning them off.

The only way to dip the lights without turning on manual high beams first is to
use the touchscreen, and it's the same number of taps as turning on the fog
light _and_ requires confirmation by pressing ok on the steering wheel.

In any other car I've been in that has automatic high beams, switching the
automatic behaviour on and off is a button or switch separate to manually
controlling them. So if automatic mode is enabled and you want to pre-emptively
prevent the high beam activating, you can just disable automatic mode.

#### Disturbing the peace

This car never seems to shut up! It feels like it's constantly beeping about
something or other. I'm not one of those people that hates driving aids and
warnings — I actually like having them... when they work as intended. The EX30
is just the embodiment of a false positive.

The most annoying one is the speed limit warning. This is required on new cars
due to UK regulations. In the EX30, it's done using road sign detection to read
the speed limit and beep at you if you're going too fast. Except the road sign
detection is frankly awful. It doesn't read national speed limit signs, meaning
it still believes the limit is lower even though it's 60 mph, and therefore
beeps even though you're driving perfectly legally.

It also likes to read signs on side roads and junctions — my favourite example
of this is the main road I join after leaving home, which has a 40 mph limit,
but without fail the car will spot the 10 mph sign from a shopping centre car
park and shout at me about it.

Thankfully the speed limit warning can be disabled, which I have to do pretty
much every time I get in the car, because it's simply not a useful feature.

A warning that _can't_ be turned off is the "driver attention alert". This uses
a sensor behind the steering wheel to constantly watch you as you're driving,
and supposedly detect when you're not paying attention or when you're tired and
need a break.

There are two problems with this: everything in the car is controlled by a giant
touchscreen on my left, which I therefore _have_ to look at to use, thereby
incurring the wrath of the attention detection, and the tiredness detection,
which seems to mostly try and detect yawning, loves to tell me I need a break if
I lick my lips. Even if I've only been driving for two minutes.

In some regions it might be possible to disable these alerts, since there's a
button for it in the menu. But in my car at least, that option is disabled and
the system cannot be turned off.

My final gripe with the warning systems is with the cross traffic alerts. This
is meant to alert you to traffic passing in front of you from the left or right,
in case you missed it when pulling out at a junction for instance. But it's far
too eager to tell you, such as at roundabouts where _by definition_ there will
be traffic crossing from the right!

I believe it's set to trigger the alert if a vehicle is approaching and you
haven't come to a complete stop. So you're not allowed to slowly creep forward
at a junction to show intent, or to simply slow down without stopping if you can
see there's a gap behind the next car as you approach.

Even if it wasn't constantly alerting unnecessarily, I believe the alert occurs
far too late to do anything about it. It can only detect vehicles when they get
within a certain distance. By the time the car has beeped and you've reacted to
it, I think you would have had a collision anyway.

As with the driver attention system, and unlike the RCTA system, this one can't
be turned off. There's not even a greyed out setting for it.

There is actually one type of alert which I wish was _more_ prominent in this
car, and that's for when a door or the charging flap has been left open. Here's
what appears on the screen when the flap is open:

![A small diagram of the car with a tiny red line where the charging flap is.](/img/2025-06/flap-open.jpg)

The red part indicating that the problem is the flap is very small, but I
suppose if you look closely you can see it. But that photo is much closer than
you would be while driving. Here's another look at the image from earlier of the
touchscreen — did you notice this warning the first time?

![A wider shot from the driver's perspective looking out the front of the car. The diagram is impossible to see properly.](/img/2025-06/ex30-touchscreen.jpeg)

I have definitely driven round with the flap open. In the zoe, a large warning
message would appear over the top of the entire driver display that said "flap
open", so there was no way to miss it.

#### Updates giveth, and updates taketh away

When I ordered my car, it was under the premise that it had features like
carplay and the ability to use a digital car key in apple wallet. They were in
the technical specification of the car on volvo's website. But when I picked up
the car from the dealer, both of these features were nowhere to be found.

The person handing over the car at the dealer didn't mention the digital key,
and told me that "actually volvo don't put wireless carplay in their cars for
safety reasons". That was absolute rubbish (of course, as I now know) and the
car didn't even have wired carplay — as I found out later, from reddit of all
places, the engineers at volvo just hadn't found a way to get carplay to work
properly within the android automotive system yet.

Needless to say, I wasn't particularly happy after getting used to carplay in my
previous car. The EX30 does have bluetooth audio, but the experience is so much
worse than being able to directly control your phone from the car's screen.

The good thing about a car running on android is the ability to get over-the-air
software updates. Thankfully carplay was added in an update, although it was
approximately 4 months after I bought the car. I feel sorry for people who had
bought theirs even earlier than I did.

The digital key functionality didn't get added until an update in march 2025, so
9 months after buying the car.

There were other things missing that got added in software updates too, like
displaying how fast the car is charging in kW, and using road sign information
to adjust cruise control speed when the speed limit changes.

But the software updates the car has received haven't all been positive. Some
things have been changed that I think are objectively worse. For instance, it
used to be that when the car locked it made a loud double beep sound, which was
great when using proximity-based locking and unlocking, because you could be
sure it had locked after walking away. One of the updates changed that loud
sound to a very subtle knocking sound which is almost impossible to hear unless
you're standing right next to the car and there's no loud traffic passing by.
The only way I can tell the car has locked when walking away is to stare at it
and watch for the indicators flashing.

They also keep rearranging the menus in software updates. It used to be that
there was a button in the shortcuts row along the bottom of the screen for
opening the boot, but that got moved into a submenu so it now takes an extra
tap. There also used to be a shortcut for disabling speed limit warnings on the
welcome screen that shows when you first get in the car, but that shortcut was
removed so now you have to go digging in the menus for that too.

#### Locked up tight... maybe

Now we get to my biggest issue, and the one that prompted me to write this
review in the first place. The EX30 does not have a regular key fob with lock
and unlock buttons.

![A black volvo key fob being held and turned over to show that there are no buttons on any side of it.](/img/2025-06/key-fob.gif)

You get an rfid card that you have to place on the driver's door pillar to lock
and unlock the car, and a chunky fob that has proximity-based locking and
unlocking, where walking up to the car unlocks it, and walking away locks it. Or
it should, at least.

Whenever the car is parked outside my house and I go out the front door, it
absolutely refuses to unlock as I approach. I end up standing there looking
extremely silly, pulling on the door handle (this usually triggers the car to
re-check whether the key is nearby) a few times before finally getting into my
own car.

Now that I have the digital key in apple wallet, there's a dedicated unlock
button on my phone and watch that I can use as if I had a normal key fob, but
it's so much slower than if there was a button on the key which is already in my
hand as I leave the house.

The digital key is also my only means of unlocking the car from further away to
let someone else get into the passenger seat while I lock the door of the house.

When out and about, the proximity unlocking does actually work, most of the time
at least. I wonder if there's some sort of timeout on the proximity feature
which is being reached while the car is parked at home. It feels like a silly
feature if so, requiring another, clunkier method of unlocking.

My other big concern is that there have been some instances where the car didn't
lock automatically and I didn't notice. The other day I stopped at lidl, and
when I came out of the shop I discovered that the car never actually locked
itself and had been sat completely open the entire time.

Since the update that removed the double beep, it's very easy to miss the sound
— especially if you're relying on proximity-based locking, because by the time
you're far enough away for it to lock, you have no chance of hearing the new
sound and you probably can't see the indicators.

It's possible to lock the car when you're standing right next to it, either by
tapping the rfid card or by touching a capacitive sensor on the driver's door
handle. The touch sensor doesn't always work first time, and I don't like that I
have to remember to use it every time or risk an unlocked car.

I think it's an extremely big problem to have these issues with the security
system on the car. I should be able to rely on any of the locking methods
available to me, and it would be so much simpler if I just had a button on the
key that I could press.

To add insult to injury, the battery life on the key fob is atrocious. It lasted
about 9 months before I had to get it replaced — by taking it to the volvo
garage of course, because it's a featureless rectangle that only they know how
to open. They charged me about £10 for what ended up being just a coin cell
battery that will probably die again in another 9 months.

#### Nitpicks

This section is a bit of a lightning round of small issues that are annoying,
but not important enough to warrant their own section.

- Media doesn't automatically pause if you park the car and open the driver's
  door. I almost always listen to podcasts in the car, so I have to manually
  pause before getting out, otherwise I'll miss a huge chunk of the podcast in
  the time between getting out and my phone disconnecting.
- Volvo is very proud that there's a harmon kardon soundbar along the front of
  the car, and it has a shiny silver logo on it that reflects in the windscreen
  at all times. I 3d printed a black cover for the logo that hides the
  reflection a little bit but not completely.
- There's a "life detection" feature that sets the alarm off if a person or
  animal is detected in the car when it's locked. That means a passenger can't
  stay in the car while the driver goes into a shop or something like that,
  since all the locking is proximity based. The feature can be temporarily
  turned off from a setting four levels deep in the menus.
- The front of the car is extremely flat, and it collects so many insects while
  driving on the motorway that it could start a career in entomology.

  ![The front of the car, which has lots of small black dots covering the yellow paint.](/img/2025-06/ex30-front.jpeg)

- The automatic switching of the cruise control speed based on the speed limit
  doesn't ask for confirmation before changing, so if the car picks up an
  incorrect speed limit, it'll suddenly hit the brakes.
- The indicator stalk doesn't physically stay in position while the indicator is
  on, it always returns to the resting position and the car just cancels the
  indicator after steering. You can push the stalk in the opposite direction to
  cancel it manually. Except sometimes I go to manually cancel it, but in the
  meantime the car has already cancelled it, so I end up indicating in the
  opposite direction. This isn't an issue with a stalk that stays in position
  while the indicator is active.

### Wrap up

I hope it's clear why I've written over 4500 words about this car, because to be
honest it feels it was designed by people who don't actually drive a car. The
way things work make it feel like they were only ever tested in a simulator or
on hardware connected to a computer on a desk, rather than in a real moving car.

In a way, I kind of wanted to warn people about buying an EX30, because I really
wouldn't recommend that anyone do so. If you're looking for a car of this size
and price, I hear the [kia EV3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kia_EV3) is an
excellent alternative.

For me personally, I can't imagine keeping this car long term. And to that
end... a couple of weeks ago I ordered a new
[renault 5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renault_5_E-Tech) which is due to be
delivered in october. It seems really silly to sell a car when it's only a year
old, but I'm so frustrated with the EX30, especially considering the security
risk regarding the locking and unlocking problems.

I did an awful lot of research on the renault 5 before ordering, and I paid
particular attention to make sure it didn't have any of the issues present on
the EX30. The key fob has actual real buttons, there are physical controls for
the usual things, and there's a driver display behind the steering wheel. And it
still runs android automotive, so I'm not losing out on any features. It feels a
lot like a modernised version of the zoe I used to drive.

I am really looking forward to when the new car arrives, mostly because it means
I can be rid of the most annoying car I've ever driven.
